draft-ietf-tls-exported-authenticator.md, before:

---
title: Exported Authenticators in TLS
abbrev: TLS Exported Authenticator
docname: draft-ietf-tls-exported-authenticator-latest
category: std

ipr:
area: Security
workgroup: TLS
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -  ins: N. Sullivan
    name: Nick Sullivan
    organization: Cloudflare Inc.
    email: nick@cloudflare.com

normative:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:
  RFC5246:
  RFC5705:
  RFC7627:
  SIGMAC:
    title: "A Unilateral-to-Mutual Authentication Compiler for Key Exchange (with Applications to Client Authentication in TLS 1.3)"
    author:
    -
      ins: "H. Krawczyk"
    date: 2016
    target: https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/711.pdf

informative:



--- abstract

This document describes a mechanism in Transport Layer Security (TLS) to
provide an exportable proof of ownership of a certificate that can be
transmitted out of band and verified by the other party.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document provides a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer
Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session
has been established.  This allows both the client and server to prove ownership
of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed.  This
proof of authentication can be exported and transmitted out of band from one
party to be validated by the other party.

This mechanism provides two advantages over the authentication that TLS natively
provides:

multiple identities -

: Endpoints that are authoritative for multiple identities - but do not have a
  single certificate that includes all of the identities - can authenticate with
  those identities over a single connection.

spontaneous authentication -

: Endpoints can authenticate after a connection is established, in response to
  events in a higher-layer protocol, as well as integrating more context.

This document intends to replace much of the functionality of renegotiation
in previous versions of TLS.  It has the advantages over renegotiation of not
requiring additional on-the-wire changes during a connection.  For simplicity,
only TLS 1.2 and later are supported.

Post-handshake authentication is defined in TLS 1.3, but it has
the disadvantage of requiring additional state to be stored in the TLS
state machine and it composes poorly with multiplexed connection protocols
like HTTP/2.  It is also only available for client authentication.  This
mechanism is intended to be used as part of a replacement for post-handshake
authentication in applications.

# Authenticator

The authenticator is a structured message that can be exported from either
party of a TLS connection.  It can be transmitted to the other party of
the TLS connection at the application layer.  The application layer protocol
used to send the authenticator SHOULD use TLS as its underlying transport.

An authenticator message can be constructed by either the client or the
server given an established TLS connection, a certificate, and a corresponding private
key.  This authenticator uses the message structures from section 4.4. of
{{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}, but different parameters.  Also, unlike the Certificate and
CertificateRequest messages in TLS 1.3, the messages described in this draft
are not encrypted with a handshake key.

Each authenticator is computed using a Handshake Context and Finished MAC Key
derived from the TLS session.  The Handshake Context is and Finished MAC Key
are dependent on whether the authenticator is created by the client or the server.

* The Handshake Context is an {{!RFC5705}} (for TLS 1.2) or
{{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} (for TLS 1.3) exporter value derived using the label
"EXPORTER-client authenticator handshake context" or "EXPORTER-server authenticator
handshake context", depending on the sender, and length 64 bytes.  The
context_value is absent (length zero).

* The Finished MAC Key is an exporter value derived using the label
"EXPORTER-server authenticator finished key" or "EXPORTER-client authenticator
finished key", depending on the sender.  The length of this key is equal to the
length of the output of the hash function selected in TLS for the pseudorandom
function (PRF); cipher suites that do not use the TLS PRF MUST define a hash
function that can be used for this purpose or they cannot be used.

If the connection is TLS 1.2, the master secret MUST have been computed
with the extended master secret {{!RFC7627}} to avoid key synchronization attacks.

Certificate
: The certificate to be used for authentication and any
supporting certificates in the chain. This structure is defined in {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}
section 4.4.2.

The certificate message contains an opaque string called
certificate_request_context which SHOULD be unique for a given connection.  Its format
is be defined by the application layer protocol and SHOULD be non-zero
length.  For example, it may be a sequence number used by the higher-level
protocol during the transport of the authenticator to the other party.  Using
a unique and unpredictable value ties the authenticator to a given context,
allowing the application to prevent authenticators from being replayed or precomputed by
an attacker with temporary access to a private key.

CertificateVerify
: A signature over the value
Hash(Handshake Context || Certificate)

This is described in section 4.2.3. of {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}.  The signature scheme
MUST be a valid signature scheme for TLS 1.3.  This excludes all RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5
algorithms and ECDSA algorithms that are not supported in TLS 1.3.  For servers,
this signature scheme must match one of the signature and hash algorithms advertised
in the signature_algorithms extension of the ClientHello.

Finished
: A HMAC over the value
Hash(Handshake Context || Certificate || CertificateVerify)
using the hash function from the handshake and the Finished MAC Key as a key.
{:br}

The certificates used in the Certificate message MUST conform to the requirements
of a Certificate message in the version of TLS negotiated.  This is
described in section 4.2.3. of {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} and
sections 7.4.2. and 7.4.6. of {{!RFC5246}}.  Alternative certificate formats such as
{{!RFC7250}} Raw Public Keys are not supported.

The exported authenticator message is the concatenation of messages:
Certificate || CertificateVerify || Finished

A given exported authenticator can be validated by checking the validity of the
CertificateVerify message and recomputing the Finished message to see it it
matches.  If the underlying connection is TLS 1.3, CertificateVerify messages
with an RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 algorithm as its SignatureScheme MUST be rejected.

# API considerations

The creation and validation of exported authenticators SHOULD be implemented inside
TLS library even if it is possible to implement it at the application layer.
TLS implementations supporting the use of exported authenticators MUST provide
application programming interfaces by which clients and servers may request
and verify exported authenticator messages.

Given an established connection, the application SHOULD be able to call an
"authenticate" API which takes as input:

 * certificate_request_context (from 1 to 255 bytes)
 * valid certificate chain for the connection and associated extensions
(OCSP, SCT, etc.)
 * signer (either the private key associated with the certificate, or interface
to perform private key operation)
 * signature scheme

The API returns the exported authentiator as output.

Given an established connection and an exported authenticator message, the
application SHOULD be able to call a "validate" API that takes an exported
authenticator as an input. If the Finished and CertificateVerify messages
verify correctly, the API returns the following as output:

 * certificate chain and extensions
 * certificate_request_context

In order for the application layer to be able to choose the certificates
and signature schemes to use when constructing an authenticator, a TLS server
SHOULD expose an API that returns the content of the signature_algorithms
extension of client's ClientHello message.

# Security Considerations

The Certificate/Verify/Finished pattern intentionally looks like the TLS 1.3
pattern which now has been analyzed several times.  In the case where the
client presents an authenticator to a server, {{SIGMAC}} presents a relevant
framework for analysis.

Authenticators are independent and unidirectional. There is no explicit state change
inside TLS when an authenticator is either created or validated.

* This property makes it difficult to formally prove
that a server is jointly authoritative over multiple certificates, rather than
individually authoritative over each.
* There is no indication in the TLS layer about which point in time an authenticator was
computed.  Any feedback about the time of creation or validation of the authenticator
should be tracked as part of the application layer semantics if required.

# Acknowledgements {#ack}

Comments on this proposal were provided by Martin Thomson.  Suggestions for the
security considerations section were provided by Karthikeyan Bhargavan.

--- back

Commit message:

Change the description of the exporters
This moves the definition of exporters to the lead-in paragraph, the definition
of the context to after the paragraph, and more clearly defines which label
goes with which role.

draft-ietf-tls-exported-authenticator.md, after:

---
title: Exported Authenticators in TLS
abbrev: TLS Exported Authenticator
docname: draft-ietf-tls-exported-authenticator-latest
category: std

ipr:
area: Security
workgroup: TLS
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -  ins: N. Sullivan
    name: Nick Sullivan
    organization: Cloudflare Inc.
    email: nick@cloudflare.com

normative:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:
  RFC5246:
  RFC5705:
  RFC7627:
  SIGMAC:
    title: "A Unilateral-to-Mutual Authentication Compiler for Key Exchange (with Applications to Client Authentication in TLS 1.3)"
    author:
    -
      ins: "H. Krawczyk"
    date: 2016
    target: https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/711.pdf

informative:



--- abstract

This document describes a mechanism in Transport Layer Security (TLS) to
provide an exportable proof of ownership of a certificate that can be
transmitted out of band and verified by the other party.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document provides a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer
Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session
has been established.  This allows both the client and server to prove ownership
of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed.  This
proof of authentication can be exported and transmitted out of band from one
party to be validated by the other party.

This mechanism provides two advantages over the authentication that TLS natively
provides:

multiple identities -

: Endpoints that are authoritative for multiple identities - but do not have a
  single certificate that includes all of the identities - can authenticate with
  those identities over a single connection.

spontaneous authentication -

: Endpoints can authenticate after a connection is established, in response to
  events in a higher-layer protocol, as well as integrating more context.

This document intends to replace much of the functionality of renegotiation
in previous versions of TLS.  It has the advantages over renegotiation of not
requiring additional on-the-wire changes during a connection.  For simplicity,
only TLS 1.2 and later are supported.

Post-handshake authentication is defined in TLS 1.3, but it has
the disadvantage of requiring additional state to be stored in the TLS
state machine and it composes poorly with multiplexed connection protocols
like HTTP/2.  It is also only available for client authentication.  This
mechanism is intended to be used as part of a replacement for post-handshake
authentication in applications.

# Authenticator

The authenticator is a structured message that can be exported from either
party of a TLS connection.  It can be transmitted to the other party of
the TLS connection at the application layer.  The application layer protocol
used to send the authenticator SHOULD use TLS as its underlying transport.

An authenticator message can be constructed by either the client or the
server given an established TLS connection, a certificate, and a corresponding private
key.  This authenticator uses the message structures from section 4.4. of
{{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}, but different parameters.  Also, unlike the Certificate and
CertificateRequest messages in TLS 1.3, the messages described in this draft
are not encrypted with a handshake key.

Each authenticator is computed using a Handshake Context and Finished MAC Key
derived from the TLS session.  These values are derived using an exporter as
described in {{!RFC5705}} (for TLS 1.2) or {{!TLS13=I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} (for
TLS 1.3).  These values use different labels depending on the role of the
sender:

* The Handshake Context is an exporter value that is derived using the label
  "EXPORTER-client authenticator handshake context" or "EXPORTER-server
  authenticator handshake context" for authenticators sent by the client and
  server respectively.  The length of the exported value is 64 bytes.

* The Finished MAC Key is an exporter value derived using the label
  "EXPORTER-server authenticator finished key" or "EXPORTER-client authenticator
  finished key" for authenticators sent by the client and server respectively.
  The length of the exported value is equal to the length of the output of the
  hash function selected in TLS for the pseudorandom function (PRF); cipher
  suites that do not use the TLS PRF MUST define a hash function that can be
  used for this purpose or they cannot be used.

The context_value used for the exporter is absent (length zero) for all four
values.

If the connection is TLS 1.2, the master secret MUST have been computed
with the extended master secret {{!RFC7627}} to avoid key synchronization attacks.

Certificate
: The certificate to be used for authentication and any
supporting certificates in the chain. This structure is defined in {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}
section 4.4.2.

The certificate message contains an opaque string called
certificate_request_context which SHOULD be unique for a given connection.  Its format
is be defined by the application layer protocol and SHOULD be non-zero
length.  For example, it may be a sequence number used by the higher-level
protocol during the transport of the authenticator to the other party.  Using
a unique and unpredictable value ties the authenticator to a given context,
allowing the application to prevent authenticators from being replayed or precomputed by
an attacker with temporary access to a private key.

CertificateVerify
: A signature over the value
Hash(Handshake Context || Certificate)

This is described in section 4.2.3. of {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}}.  The signature scheme
MUST be a valid signature scheme for TLS 1.3.  This excludes all RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5
algorithms and ECDSA algorithms that are not supported in TLS 1.3.  For servers,
this signature scheme must match one of the signature and hash algorithms advertised
in the signature_algorithms extension of the ClientHello.

Finished
: A HMAC over the value
Hash(Handshake Context || Certificate || CertificateVerify)
using the hash function from the handshake and the Finished MAC Key as a key.
{:br}

The certificates used in the Certificate message MUST conform to the requirements
of a Certificate message in the version of TLS negotiated.  This is
described in section 4.2.3. of {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} and
sections 7.4.2. and 7.4.6. of {{!RFC5246}}.  Alternative certificate formats such as
{{!RFC7250}} Raw Public Keys are not supported.

The exported authenticator message is the concatenation of messages:
Certificate || CertificateVerify || Finished

A given exported authenticator can be validated by checking the validity of the
CertificateVerify message and recomputing the Finished message to see it it
matches.  If the underlying connection is TLS 1.3, CertificateVerify messages
with an RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 algorithm as its SignatureScheme MUST be rejected.

# API considerations

The creation and validation of exported authenticators SHOULD be implemented inside
TLS library even if it is possible to implement it at the application layer.
TLS implementations supporting the use of exported authenticators MUST provide
application programming interfaces by which clients and servers may request
and verify exported authenticator messages.

Given an established connection, the application SHOULD be able to call an
"authenticate" API which takes as input:

 * certificate_request_context (from 1 to 255 bytes)
 * valid certificate chain for the connection and associated extensions
(OCSP, SCT, etc.)
 * signer (either the private key associated with the certificate, or interface
to perform private key operation)
 * signature scheme

The API returns the exported authentiator as output.

Given an established connection and an exported authenticator message, the
application SHOULD be able to call a "validate" API that takes an exported
authenticator as an input. If the Finished and CertificateVerify messages
verify correctly, the API returns the following as output:

 * certificate chain and extensions
 * certificate_request_context

In order for the application layer to be able to choose the certificates
and signature schemes to use when constructing an authenticator, a TLS server
SHOULD expose an API that returns the content of the signature_algorithms
extension of client's ClientHello message.

# Security Considerations

The Certificate/Verify/Finished pattern intentionally looks like the TLS 1.3
pattern which now has been analyzed several times.  In the case where the
client presents an authenticator to a server, {{SIGMAC}} presents a relevant
framework for analysis.

Authenticators are independent and unidirectional. There is no explicit state change
inside TLS when an authenticator is either created or validated.

* This property makes it difficult to formally prove
that a server is jointly authoritative over multiple certificates, rather than
individually authoritative over each.
* There is no indication in the TLS layer about which point in time an authenticator was
computed.  Any feedback about the time of creation or validation of the authenticator
should be tracked as part of the application layer semantics if required.

# Acknowledgements {#ack}

Comments on this proposal were provided by Martin Thomson.  Suggestions for the
security considerations section were provided by Karthikeyan Bhargavan.

--- back
